[okta-459281] Okta Email (OTP/EML) integration guide (.NET SDK) (#3186)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/guides/authenticators-okta-email/main/index.md

---
**Learning outcomes**

> * Configure your Okta org to use the email authenticator

Author: fixed

> * Enroll and challenge a user with email OTP and magic links

Author: fixed

> * Enable OTP only for the email authenticator

Author: fixed

## Overview

With the Embedded SDK, your app can verify a user's identity using the email authenticator. You can integrate the email enrollment and challenge in your app and complete those flows using magic links, OTP, or a combination of both. Use this guide to learn how.

### Discover the convenience of magic links

> When using OTP, a user must switch between your app to their email, find the OTP, switch back to your app again, type in the OTP and hit submit to verify their identity. Compare this to using magic links where verification requires the user only to click on a link in the email - a far quicker, more user-convenient, and yet still secure experience.

Author: fixed

> When using OTP, a user must switch from your app to their email, find the OTP, switch back to your app again, type in the OTP and click submit to verify their identity. Compare this to using magic links, where verification only requires the user to click on a link in the email - a far quicker, more user-convenient, and yet still secure experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using OTP, a user must switch from your app to their email, find the OTP, switch back to your app again, type in the OTP and click submit to verify their identity. Compare this to using magic links, where verification only requires the user to click a link in the email - a far quicker, more user-convenient, and yet still secure experience.
```

Author: fixed

<div class="common-image-format">

![Simple diagram illustrating magic links](/img/authenticators/authenticators-email-magic-link-summary-simple-overview.png)

</div>

## Get started

> This guide walks you through the email authenticator user journeys for both magic links and OTP and details step-by-step how to integrate the email enrollment and challenge flows into your app. For more details, see the following sections in this guide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide walks you through the email authenticator user journeys for both magic links and OTP and details how to integrate the email enrollment and challenge flows into your app. For more details, see the following sections in this guide:
```

Author: fixed

**Magic links**

> 1. [Understand magic link flow before you integrate](#understand-the-magic-link-flow): Learn the magic link user journey

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Understand the magic link flow before you integrate](#understand-the-magic-link-flow): Learn the magic link user journey.
```

Author: fixed

> 1. [Know which use cases support magic link and OTP](#know-which-use-cases-support-magic-link-and-otp): Understand magic link and OTP support across the supported use cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Know which use cases support magic link and OTP](#know-which-use-cases-support-magic-link-and-otp): Understand magic link and OTP support across the supported use cases.
```

Author: fixed

> 1. [Update Configurations](#update-configurations): Set up your org to enable the email authenticator and magic links

Author: fixed

1. [Integrate email challenge with magic links](#integrate-email-challenge-with-magic-links): Integrate email challenge using magic links with step-by-step instructions

> 1. [Integrate different browser and device scenario with magic links](#integrate-different-browser-and-device-scenario-with-magic-links): Integrate the different browser and device scenarios with step-by-step instructions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Integrate different browser and device scenario with magic links](#integrate-different-browser-and-device-scenario-with-magic-links): Integrate the different browser and device scenarios with step-by-step instructions.
```

Author: fixed

**OTP**

1. [Integrate email enrollment with OTP](#integrate-email-enrollment-with-otp): Integrate email enrollment using OTP with step-by-step instructions

> 1. [Enable only OTP for the email authenticator](#enable-only-otp-for-the-email-authenticator): Update the email templates to only support OTP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. [Enable only OTP for the email authenticator](#enable-only-otp-for-the-email-authenticator): Update the email templates to only support OTP.
```

Author: fixed

**Advanced use cases**

1. [Design considerations when customizing magic link for password recovery](#design-considerations-when-customizing-magic-link-for-password-recovery): Learn about recommended magic link implementations for specific customized password recovery solutions.

## Understand the magic link flow

Before integrating email magic links in your app, it's important to understand how your app's user journey starts and ends. An example user journey for a sign-in with email use case:

1. Using your app, a user submits their username and password. Next, an email is sent to the user and your app displays an OTP input page.

> 1. Using a new tab in the browser, the user opens their email and clicks on the magic link.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Using a new tab in the browser, the user opens their email and clicks the magic link.
```

Author: fixed

> 1. In a new tab, the link redirects to your app and automatically signs the user in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In a new tab, the link redirects the browser to your app and automatically signs the user in.
```

Author: fixed

The following diagram illustrates these steps.

<div class="common-image-format">

![Diagram showing magic link flow for same and different browsers](/img/authenticators/authenticators-email-magic-link-summary-user-flow-overview.png)

</div>

> Note that the user is within the same browser when they start the sign-in and click on the magic link.

Author: fixed

> Note that the user stays within the same browser when they start the sign-in flow and click on the magic link in their email.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The user stays within the same browser when they start the sign-in flow and clicks the magic link in their email.
```

Author: fixed

### The reason for the OTP input page

Your app should always display an OTP input page to allow the user to use the OTP as an alternative method to complete the verification. For security reasons, the user must use an OTP when they access their email on a different browser or device. See [Integrate different browser and device scenario](#integrate-different-browser-and-device-scenario-with-magic-links) to learn how to handle this scenario and [Integrate email enrollment with OTP](#integrate-email-enrollment-with-otp) to integrate OTP in your application.

## Know which use cases support magic link and OTP

> Out of the box, the Embedded SDK solution supports magic links for various use cases. For those use cases where magic links is not fully supported, OTP is available. See the following support matrix for more details:

Author: Not changing. "Magic links" here is the feature so is singular.

> Out of the box, the Embedded SDK solution supports magic links for various use cases. For those use cases where magic links is not fully supported, OTP is available. See the following support matrix for more details:

Reviewer: perhaps, since magic links is lowercase....might be hard to discern that it's a "feature"?

```suggestion
Out of the box, the Embedded SDK solution supports magic links for various use cases. For those use cases where the magic links feature isn't fully supported, OTP is available. See the following support matrix for more details:
```

> Out of the box, the Embedded SDK solution supports magic links for various use cases. For those use cases where magic links is not fully supported, OTP is available. See the following support matrix for more details:

Reviewer 2: If it is the feature being referenced, then the full name is "Email Magic Link" (as per the PM spec https://docs.google.com/document/d/18xXSVzw4oCDpbeedzc1GFIa9Oo2oU2qc5fWuz8FfyKE/edit#heading=h.ldpelvtsnlbv) 

```suggestion
Out of the box, the Embedded SDK solution supports the Email Magic Link feature for various use cases. For those use cases where the feature isn't fully supported, OTP is available. See the following support matrix for more details:
```

> Out of the box, the Embedded SDK solution supports magic links for various use cases. For those use cases where magic links is not fully supported, OTP is available. See the following support matrix for more details:

Author: OK - Email Magic LInks it is

| Email template name  | Use cases  | Email authenticator flow  | Supported methods | Template customizations needed |
| ----------------------------| ------------------|------------------------|-------------|-------------------------|

> | Email Factor Verification   | Self service registration, Sign-in with email - enroll   | Email enrollment  | [OTP](#integrate-email-enrollment-with-otp)              | Yes, remove magic link

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Email Factor Verification   | Self-service registration, Sign-in with email - enroll   | Email enrollment  | [OTP](#integrate-email-enrollment-with-otp)              | Yes, remove magic link
```

Author: fixed

| Email Challenge             | Sign-in with email - challenge                           | Email challenge   | [Magic link](#integrate-email-challenge-with-magic-links), OTP  | No

> | Forgot Password             | Self-service password recovery                           | Email challenge   | [Magic link](#integrate-email-challenge-with-magic-links), OTP  | Yes, add `otp` and `state` parameters. See <StackSnippet snippet="custompwdguide" inline />  for more details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Forgot Password             | Self-service password recovery                           | Email challenge   | [Magic link](#integrate-email-challenge-with-magic-links), OTP  | Yes, add `otp` and `state` parameters. See <StackSnippet snippet="custompwdguide" inline />.
```

Author: fixed

> **Note:** This guide uses the sign-in with email use cases to describe how to integrate email enrollment and challenge.

## Update configurations

> Before you can start using the email authenticator, you need to enable it in your Okta org and assign it an authentication policy which requires it to be used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you can start using the email authenticator, you need to enable it in your Okta org and assign it an authentication policy that requires the email authenticator.
```

### Add the email authenticator to your org

First, add the email authenticator to your org and enable it for both authentication and recovery.

1. Open the **Admin Console** for your org.
2. Choose **Security > Authenticators** to show the available authenticators.
3. If the **Email** authenticator isn’t in the list:
   1. Click **Add Authenticator**.
   2. Click **Add** on the **Email** tile.
   3. Select the **Authentication and recovery** option, and then click **Save**.

   If the **Email** authenticator is in the list:
   1. Click the **Actions** menu for the **Email** authenticator.
   2. Click **Edit**.
   3. Select the **Authentication and recovery** option, and then click **Save**.
4. Select the **Enrollment** tab.
5. Check that **Email** is set to either **Optional** or **Required** in the **Eligible Authenticators** section of the Default Policy.

>    1. If **Email** is set to **Disabled**, click **Edit** for the Default Policy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   1. If **Email** is set to **Disabled**, click **Edit** for the Default Policy.
```

Author: fixed

>    2. Select **Optional** from the drop-down box for the **Email** authenticator, and then click **Update Policy**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Select **Optional** from the dropdown list for the **Email** authenticator, and then click **Update Policy**.
```

Author: fixed

### Set your app integration to use the email authenticator

> New apps are automatically assigned the shared default [authentication policy](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&id=ext-about-asop). This policy has a catch-all rule that allows a user access to the app using either one or two factors, depending on your org setup. In production, it becomes evident when you can share your authentication needs between apps. In testing, it's recommended that you create a new policy specifically for your app.

Author: How about "In production, it becomes evident when multiple app integrations can share the same application policy. In testing however, it's recommended that you create a new policy......."

> New apps are automatically assigned the shared default [authentication policy](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&id=ext-about-asop). This policy has a catch-all rule that allows a user access to the app using either one or two factors, depending on your org setup. In production, it becomes evident when you can share your authentication needs between apps. In testing, it's recommended that you create a new policy specifically for your app.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: 
> In production, multiple app integrations can share the same application policy. In testing however, it's recommended that you create a new policy specifically for your test application.

> New apps are automatically assigned the shared default [authentication policy](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?type=oie&id=ext-about-asop). This policy has a catch-all rule that allows a user access to the app using either one or two factors, depending on your org setup. In production, it becomes evident when you can share your authentication needs between apps. In testing, it's recommended that you create a new policy specifically for your app.

Author: Yup - good with me

1. Open the **Admin Console** for your org.
2. Choose **Security > Authentication Policies** to show the available authentication policies.
3. Click **Add a Policy**.
4. Give the policy a name, and then click **Save**.
5. Locate the Catch-all Rule of the new policy and select **Actions > Edit**.
6. Select **Allowed after successful authentication**.
7. Set **User must authenticate with** to **Password + Another factor**.

> 8. For **Possession factor constraints**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. For **Possession factor constraints**:
```

Author: fixed

   1. Verify that **Device Bound** isn’t selected.

>    2. Verify that **Email** is listed in the box under **Additional factor types**. If it is not listed, check the authenticator has been enabled using steps 4 and 5 of [Add the email authenticator to your org](#add-the-email-authenticator-to-your-org).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Verify that **Email** is listed in the box under **Additional factor types**. If it isn't listed, verify that the authenticator is enabled using steps 4 and 5 of [Add the email authenticator to your org](#add-the-email-authenticator-to-your-org).
```

Author: fixed

   3. Click **Save**.

9. Select the **Applications** tab for your newly created policy, and then click **Add App**.
10. Find your app in the list and click **Add** next to it.
11. Click **Close**.
12. Verify that the app is now listed in the **Applications** tab of the new policy.

### Set up magic links

Enable magic links in your org.

1. Open the **Admin Console** for your Okta org.

> 2. Choose **Applications > Applications** to show the app integrations you have already created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Choose **Applications > Applications** to show the app integrations that you have already created.
```

Author: fixed

> 3. Click on the application you’ve previously created on the Applications page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. On the Applications page, click the application where you want to enable the email magic link feature.
```

Author: Not changing. We do the action first, location second.

Reviewer: If I previously approved this, I'm sorry that I didn't catch this. With "on the Applications page" at the end - it's not clear whether you are saying click the application that you previously created "on the Applications page" - meaning they created it on this page or does it mean that "on the Applications page" click the application that they previously created? It's more clear if you put "On the Applications page" first or just remove it all together. I suggest removing it since they are ON that page after selecting Applications | Applications.

```suggestion
3. Click the application that you previously created.
```

Reviewer 2: We use somewhat different language for the selection process in the help docs when choosing an application (c.f. https://help.okta.com/oie/en-us/Content/Topics/Apps/apps-assign-applications.htm) but I defer to Susan's comment on the wording for Dev Doc guidance.

Author: Thank you both - have used Susan's suggestion here.

> 4. In the **General Settings** tab under the **General** tab, and then click **Edit**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. On the **General** tab, click **Edit** in the **General Settings** panel.
```

Author: Not changing. These instructions were already approved by four people.

Reviewer: My apologies if I missed this before - but this is wrong. It's the General Settings section on the General tab. They are IN that section and ON that tab, not under the tab. Also, they have performed no other action prior to clicking *Edit*, so "and then" isn't necessary.

```suggestion
4. In the **General Settings** section on the **General** tab, click **Edit**
```

Reviewer 2: I defer to Susan's improvements on the wording and order.

Author: Thank you both

5. Under **EMAIL VERIFICATION EXPERIENCE** enter a callback URI for your application. The sample application uses <StackSnippet snippet="callbackuri" inline />.
6. Click **Save** to save your changes.

<StackSnippet snippet="integratechallengemagiclinksummary"/>

<StackSnippet snippet="integratechallengemagiclink" /> <!-- UNIQUE FOR BACKEND  -->

## Integrate different browser and device scenario with magic links

> Magic links is made with security in mind and only works when there is complete assurance that the person who started the request is the same one who clicked on the magic link. For example, a user who started signing into your app in a web browser must be in the same browser when they click on the magic link. If the browser or device is different, magic links is disabled, and they need to use OTP or be in the same browser to complete the email verification. The following flowchart illustrates this logic.

Author: fixed

> The email magic links feature is designed with security in mind and only works when there is complete assurance that the person who started the request is the same one who clicked on the magic link. For example, a user who started signing into your app in a web browser must be in the same browser when they click on the magic link. If the user's browser or device is different, the magic link is disabled, and they need to use OTP or return to the original browser to complete the email verification. The following flowchart illustrates this logic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The email magic links feature is designed with security in mind and only works when there is complete assurance that the person who started the request is the same one who clicked the magic link. For example, a user who started signing in to your app in a web browser must be in the same browser when they click the magic link. If the user's browser or device is different, the magic link is disabled, and they need to use OTP or return to the original browser to complete the email verification. The following flowchart illustrates this logic.
```

Author: fixed

Enable magic links in your org.

1. Open the **Admin Console** for your Okta org.
2. Choose **Applications > Applications** to show the app integrations that you have already created.

> 3. Click on the application that you previously created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Click the application that you previously created.
```

Author: fixed
